THE PROLOGUE

When April, with its sweet showers, has pierced the drought of March to the
root and bathed every vein in such liquid that the flower is born from it; when
the gentle west wind, Zephyrus, has breathed life into the tender crops in
every grove and field, and the young sun has run half its course in Aries, and
small birds make melody, sleeping all night with open eyes, so nature stirs
them in their hearts; then people long to go on pilgrimages, and travelers seek
distant shores to visit holy shrines in various lands. Especially from every
corner of England, they travel to Canterbury to seek the holy blessed martyr
who has helped them when they were sick.

It happened that in this season, one day in Southwark at the Tabard Inn, as I
lay ready to go on my pilgrimage to Canterbury with a devout heart, there came
into that inn at night a company of twenty-nine people, of various sorts, who
had by chance fallen into fellowship, and they were all pilgrims who intended
to ride to Canterbury. The rooms and stables were spacious, and we were well
provided with the best. Shortly, when the sun had set, I had spoken with every
one of them, and I was soon part of their fellowship, and we made a promise to
rise early to take our way as I will describe to you.

But nonetheless, while I have time and space, before I proceed further in this
tale, I think it reasonable to tell you the condition of each of them, as it
seemed to me, and who they were, and of what degree; and also in what array
they were in: and I will begin with a Knight.

There was a Knight, and he was a worthy man, who from the time he first began
to ride out, loved chivalry, truth, honor, freedom, and courtesy. He was very
worthy in his lord's wars, and he had ridden farther than any man, both in
Christendom and in heathen lands, and was always honored for his worthiness. He
was at Alexandria when it was won. He had often sat at the head of the table
above all nations in Prussia. He had journeyed in Lithuania and Russia, no
Christian man of his rank had traveled so often. He had been at the siege of
Algeciras in Granada, and ridden in Morocco. He was at the battles of Benmarin
and in the Great Sea at many a noble army. He had been in fifteen mortal
battles and fought for our faith at Tlemcen. He had fought three times in duels
and always killed his foe. This same worthy knight had also been with the lord
of Palatinate against another heathen in Turkey. He was always held in very
high esteem. And though he was worthy, he was wise, and as humble as a maid. He
never spoke any rude words in all his life to any person. He was a true perfect
gentle knight. But to tell you of his attire, his horse was good, but he was
not finely dressed. He wore a fustian tunic, all stained by his coat of mail,
for he had just come back from his travels and was going on his pilgrimage.

With him was his son, a young Squire, a lover, and a lively bachelor, with
curly locks as if they were pressed. He was about twenty years old, of average
height, and wonderfully agile and strong. He had been on cavalry raids in
Flanders, Artois, and Picardy, and had conducted himself well in such a short
time, hoping to stand in his lady's favor. He was embroidered like a meadow
full of fresh flowers, white and red. He was singing or playing the flute all
day; he was as fresh as the month of May. His gown was short, with long wide
sleeves. He could sit well on a horse and ride beautifully. He could make songs
and write well, joust, dance, draw, and write. He loved so passionately that he
slept no more than a nightingale. He was courteous, humble, and helpful, and
carved before his father at the table.

He had a Yeoman, and no more servants at that time, for it pleased him to ride
so. He was dressed in a coat and hood of green. He carried a sheaf of peacock
arrows under his belt, well-kept. He knew how to handle his equipment like a
yeoman. His arrows did not droop with low feathers, and he carried a mighty
bow. He had a round face with a brown complexion. He knew all the ways of
woodcraft. He wore a bright arm guard on his arm, and by his side, a sword and
a small shield, and on the other side, a sharp dagger, well-equipped. He wore a
silver St.  Christopher on his chest. He carried a horn with a green strap. He
was certainly a forester, as I guess.

There was also a Nun, a Prioress, who was very simple and modest in her
smiling. Her greatest oath was by Saint Loy, and she was called Madame
Eglantine. She sang the divine service well, intoned in her nose very properly.
She spoke French well and elegantly, according to the school of
Stratford-at-Bow, for the French of Paris was unknown to her. At meals, she was
well taught; she let no morsel fall from her lips, nor dipped her fingers deep
in her sauce. She could carry a morsel well and keep it so that no drop fell on
her breast. She took great pleasure in courtesy. She wiped her upper lip so
clean that no trace of grease was seen in her cup when she had drunk her
draught. She reached for her food very properly. She was surely of a lively
disposition, full pleasant, and amiable in demeanor. She took pains to imitate
the manners of the court and to be dignified in her behavior, and to be
considered worthy of reverence. But to speak of her conscience, she was so
charitable and full of pity that she would weep if she saw a mouse caught in a
trap, whether it was dead or bleeding. She had small dogs that she fed with
roasted meat, milk, and fine white bread. But she wept sorely if one of them
died or if someone struck it smartly with a stick. All this was due to her
conscience and tender heart. Her wimple was neatly pleated; her nose was
well-formed; her eyes gray as glass; her mouth small, soft, and red; but surely
she had a fair forehead. It was almost a span broad, I believe, for certainly,
she was not small. Her cloak was neat, as I noticed. She wore a small coral
bracelet on her arm, with green beads, and on it hung a golden brooch, on which
was written a crowned A, and after, "Amor vincit omnia" (Love conquers all).
She had another Nun with her, who was her chaplain, and three Priests.

There was a Monk, a fine one above all others, an outrider who loved hunting.
He was a manly man, fit to be an abbot. He had many fine horses in his stable,
and when he rode, you could hear his bridle jingling in the wind as clear and
loud as the chapel bell where he was the keeper of the cell. He let old things
pass and followed the new world. He cared nothing for the text that says
hunters are not holy men, nor that a monk out of his cloister is like a fish
out of water. He held this text worth less than an oyster. And I say his
opinion was good. Why should he study and make himself mad by always poring
over a book in the cloister, or toil with his hands, as St. Augustine bids? How
shall the world be served? Let Augustine have his toil reserved for him.
Therefore, he was a true rider. He had greyhounds as swift as birds in flight.
His pleasure was in riding and hunting the hare, for no cost would he spare. I
saw his sleeves trimmed with the finest fur, and to fasten his hood under his
chin, he had a gold pin with a love knot at the larger end. His head was bald
and shone like glass, and his face was as if it had been anointed. He was a
lord full fat and in good condition. His eyes were deep-set and rolling in his
head, which steamed like a furnace of lead. His boots were supple, his horse in
great condition. Certainly, he was a fine prelate. He was not pale like a
wasted ghost. He loved a fat swan best of any roast. His horse was as brown as
a berry.

There was a Friar, a wanton and merry one, a licensed beggar, a solemn man. In
all the four orders, there was none who knew so much of dalliance and fair
language. He had arranged many marriages for young women at his own cost. He
was a noble pillar of his order. He was well-loved and familiar with the
wealthy landowners everywhere in his country, and also with worthy women of the
town. For he had the power of confession, as he said himself, more than a
parish priest, for he was licensed by his order. He heard confession sweetly
and gave pleasant absolution. He was an easy man to give penance where he knew
he would get a good payment. For to give to a poor order is a sign that a man
is well shriven. For if he gave, he dared to boast, he knew that the man was
repentant. For many a man is so hard-hearted, he may not weep although he
suffers greatly. Therefore, instead of weeping and prayers, men must give
silver to the poor friars. His tippet was always stuffed full of knives and
pins to give to fair wives. And certainly, he had a merry note: he could sing
and play from memory. He was the best at singing songs. His neck was as white
as the fleur-de-lis. He was strong as a champion and knew well the taverns in
every town, and every innkeeper and barmaid better than a leper or a beggar.
For it was not fitting for such a worthy man as he to have acquaintance with
such lepers. It is not honorable, it may not advance, to deal with such refuse,
but all with the rich and sellers of victuals. And everywhere where profit
should arise, he was courteous and humble in service. There was no man anywhere
so virtuous. He was the best beggar in all his house, and he paid a certain
rent for the privilege. None of his brethren came into his territory. For
though a widow had only one shoe, so pleasant was his "In Principio," yet he
would have a farthing before he left. His income was much better than his rent.
And he could rage and play like a puppy in love days; there he could greatly
help. For he was not like a cloistered monk with a threadbare cope like a poor
scholar, but he was like a master or a pope. His short cloak was of double
worsted, rounded like a bell out of the press. He lisped a little for his
wantonness, to make his English sweet upon his tongue. And in his harping, when
he had sung, his eyes twinkled in his head like the stars in a frosty night.
This worthy friar was called Huberd.

There was a Merchant with a forked beard, dressed in motley, and he sat high on
his horse. He wore a Flanders beaver hat on his head. His boots were clasped
neatly. He always spoke solemnly about increasing his profits. He wanted the
sea to be protected at all costs between Middleburg and Orwell. He knew how to
sell currency well. This worthy man employed his wits well; no one knew he was
in debt, so well he managed his affairs with his bargains and business
contracts. For truth, he was a worthy man withal, but to tell the truth, I do
not know his name.

There was also a Clerk from Oxford who had long devoted himself to logic. His
horse was as lean as a rake, and he was not very fat, I assure you; but he
looked hollow and soberly. His outermost short cloak was threadbare, for he had
not yet obtained a benefice, nor was he worldly enough to have an office. He
would rather have at his bed's head twenty books, bound in black or red, of
Aristotle and his philosophy, than rich robes, a fiddle, or a psaltery. But
although he was a philosopher, he had little gold in his coffer, but all that
he could get from his friends, he spent on books and learning, and busily
prayed for the souls of those who gave him the means to study. He took most
care and heed of study. He spoke not one word more than was necessary, and that
was said in form and reverence, and short and quick, and full of high meaning.
His speech was full of moral virtue, and he gladly learned and gladly taught.

There was a Sergeant of the Law, wary and wise, who had often been at the
Parvis. He was full rich in excellence. Discreet he was, and of great
reverence. He seemed such, his words were so wise. He was often a judge in
assizes, by patent and full commission. For his knowledge and high renown, he
had many fees and robes. There was no greater purchaser anywhere. All was fee
simple to him, in effect. His purchasing could not be suspected. Nowhere was
there a busier man, and yet he seemed busier than he was. He knew all the cases
and judgments that had fallen since the time of King William. He could indite
and make a thing. No one could find fault with his writing. He knew every
statute by heart. He rode plainly in a multicolored coat, girded with a silk
sash with small bars. I tell no more of his attire.

There was a Franklin in this company; his beard was as white as a daisy. He was
sanguine in complexion. He loved a sop in wine in the morning. To live in
delight was always his custom, for he was Epicurus' own son, who held the
opinion that full delight was truly perfect happiness. He was a great
householder. He was Saint Julian in his country. His bread and ale were always
the same. There was no better stocked man anywhere. His house was never without
baked meat, of fish and flesh, and that so plentiful that it snowed in his
house with meat and drink, of all the dainties that men could think. According
to the seasons of the year, he changed his meat and supper. He had many fat
partridges in a cage, and many bream and pike in a fish pond. Woe was his cook
unless his sauce was sharp and ready. His table was always set in his hall all
day long. At sessions, he was lord and sire. He was often a Member of
Parliament. A dagger and a silk purse hung at his girdle, white as morning
milk. He had been a sheriff and a county auditor. There was no such worthy
landowner anywhere.

There were also a Haberdasher, a Carpenter, a Weaver, a Dyer, and a Tapestry
Maker, all clothed in the same livery, of a solemn and great fraternity. Their
gear was all fresh and new.  Their knives were mounted not with brass, but all
with silver, clean and well wrought. Their girdles and pouches were all in
every part. Each of them seemed a fair burgess, fit to sit in a guild hall on
the dais. Each, for the wisdom he knew, was fit to be an alderman. For they had
enough property and income, and their wives would well agree to it. Otherwise,
they would certainly be to blame. It is very fair to be called "madame," and to
go to vigils all before, and have a mantle royally carried.

They had a Cook with them for the occasion, to boil the chickens and the marrow
bones, and to season with tart powder and galingale. He could know a draught of
London ale well. He could roast, stew, broil, and fry, make stews, and bake a
pie well. But it was a great harm, as it seemed to me, that he had an ulcer on
his shin. For blancmange, he made it with the best.

There was a Shipman, who lived far to the west, for all I know, he was from
Dartmouth. He rode on a hack as best he could, all in a gown of coarse cloth to
the knee. He had a dagger hanging by a lace around his neck under his arm. The
hot summer had made his complexion all brown. And certainly, he was a good
fellow. He had drawn many a draught of wine from Bordeaux while the merchants
slept. He took no heed of nice conscience. If he fought and had the upper hand,
he sent them home by water to every land. But of his craft, to reckon well his
tides, his streams and his shores, his harbors, his moon, and his navigation,
there was none such from Hull to Carthage. He was hardy and wise, I assure you.
With many a tempest, his beard had been shaken. He knew well all the havens, as
they were, from Scotland to the Cape of Finisterre, and every creek in Brittany
and Spain. His barge was called the Magdalen.

With us, there was a Doctor of Medicine; in all this world, there was none like
him to speak of medicine and surgery. For he was grounded in astronomy. He kept
his patient a great deal in hours by his natural magic. He could make fortunate
the ascendant of his images for his patient. He knew the cause of every malady,
whether it was of cold, hot, moist, or dry, and where it was engendered, and of
what humor. He was a very perfect practitioner. The cause known, and the root
of his harm, he gave the sick man his remedy at once. He had his apothecaries
ready to send his drugs and his medicines, for each of them made the other to
win. Their friendship was not new to begin. He knew well the old Esculapius,
and Dioscorides, and also Rufus; old Hippocrates, Hali, and Galen; Serapion,
Rasis, and Avicenna; Averroes, Damascene, and Constantine; Bernard, and
Gatisden, and Gilbert. Of his diet, he was moderate, for it was of no
superfluity, but of great nourishment and digestible. His study was but little
on the Bible. He was dressed all in red and blue, lined with taffeta and fine
silk. And yet he was but easy of expense. He kept what he won in the
pestilence. For gold in medicine is a cordial; therefore, he loved gold
especially.

There was a good Wife from near Bath, but she was somewhat deaf, and that was a
pity. She had such a skill in cloth-making, she surpassed those of Ypres and
Ghent. In all the parish, there was no wife who should go to the offering
before her, and if there did, she was so angry that she was out of all charity.
Her head-dresses were very fine, I dare swear they weighed ten pounds that were
on her head on Sunday. Her stockings were of fine scarlet red, tightly tied,
and her shoes were fresh and new. Her face was bold, fair, and red of hue. She
was a worthy woman all her life, she had had five husbands at the church door,
besides other company in her youth; but there is no need to speak of that now.
She had been three times to Jerusalem; she had crossed many strange rivers. She
had been to Rome, and to Boulogne, in Galicia at Saint James, and at Cologne;
she knew much of wandering by the way. She was gap-toothed, truly to say. She
sat easily on an ambling horse, well wimpled, and on her head a hat as broad as
a buckler or a shield. A foot-mantle about her hips large, and on her feet a
pair of sharp spurs. In fellowship, she could laugh and talk well. She knew the
remedies of love, for she knew the old dance of that art.

There was a good man of religion, a poor Parson of a town, but rich he was in
holy thought and work. He was also a learned man, a clerk, who would truly
preach Christ's gospel. He would devoutly teach his parishioners. He was kind
and wonderfully diligent, and in adversity, very patient. He was often proven
to be so. He was very reluctant to curse for his tithes, but would rather give,
without a doubt, to his poor parishioners around, from his offering and also
from his substance. He could be satisfied with very little. His parish was
wide, and houses far apart, but he did not leave, for no rain nor thunder, to
visit the farthest in his parish, great and small, on foot, with a staff in his
hand. He gave this noble example to his sheep, that he first worked, and
afterward taught. He took the words from the gospel, and added this figure to
it, that if gold rusts, what should iron do? For if a priest is foul, on whom
we trust, no wonder is it for an unlearned man to rust. And it is a shame if a
priest takes care to see a dirty shepherd and clean sheep. A priest ought to
give an example by his own cleanliness, how his sheep should live. He did not
rent out his benefice, and leave his sheep encumbered in the mire, and run to
London, to Saint Paul's, to seek a chantry for souls, or to be detained with a
brotherhood. But he dwelt at home and kept his fold well, so that the wolf did
not make it miscarry. He was a shepherd, and not a mercenary. And though he was
holy and virtuous, he was not severe to sinful men, nor dangerous nor
disdainful in his speech, but discreet and kind in his teaching. To draw people
to heaven with fairness, by good example, was his business. But if there were
any person obstinate, whether he was of high or low estate, he would sharply
reprove him for the occasion. I believe there is no better priest anywhere. He
waited for no pomp nor reverence, nor made himself a false conscience, but
taught Christ's lore and his apostles' twelve, and first followed it himself.

With him, there was a Ploughman, who was his brother, who had laid many a ton
of dung. He was a true and good hard worker, living in peace and perfect
charity. He loved God best with all his heart at all times, whether it was gain
or pain, and then his neighbor as himself. He would thresh, and also dig
ditches and delve, for Christ's sake, for every poor person, without hire, if
it was in his power. He paid his tithes fully and well, both of his own labor
and his goods. He rode in a sleeveless jerkin on a mare.

There was also a Reeve, a Miller, a Summoner, a Pardoner, a Manciple, and
myself, there were no more.

The Miller was a stout fellow for the occasion, full big he was of brawn and
bones; that proved well, for wherever he came, at wrestling he would bear away
the ram. He was short-shouldered, broad, a thick-set fellow. There was no door
that he could not heave off its bar, or break it at a run with his head. His
beard was as red as any sow or fox, and broad as if it were a spade. On the top
of his nose, he had a wart, and on it stood a tuft of hairs red as the bristles
of a sow's ears. His nostrils were black and wide. He carried a sword and a
small shield by his side. His mouth was as wide as a furnace. He was a talker
and a buffoon, and that was mostly of sin and lewdness. He could steal corn
well and take three times the toll, and yet he had a thumb of gold, indeed. He
wore a white coat and a blue hood. He could blow and play the bagpipes well,
and with that, he brought us out of town.

There was a gentle Manciple of a temple, from whom buyers could take an example
to be wise in buying victuals. For whether he paid or took on credit, he always
waited so in his purchase that he was always ahead in good condition. Now is
not that a full fair grace from God that such an unlearned man's wit shall
surpass the wisdom of a heap of learned men? He had more than thirty masters,
who were expert and curious in law, of which there was a dozen in that house,
worthy to be stewards of rent and land of any lord in England, to make him live
by his own means, in honor, debtless, unless he were mad, or live as sparingly
as he desired; and able to help all a shire in any case that might fall or
happen; and yet this Manciple outwitted them all.

The Reeve was a slender, choleric man. His beard was shaved as close as he
could. His hair was cut round by his ears, and his top was docked like a
priest's. His legs were long and lean, like a staff, there was no calf to be
seen. He could keep a granary and a bin well. There was no auditor who could
win against him. He knew well by the drought and by the rain, the yield of his
seed and his grain. His lord's sheep, cattle, and dairy, his swine, his horses,
his store, and his poultry, were all in this Reeve's governing, and by his
covenant, he gave an account, since his lord was twenty years of age. No man
could bring him into arrears. There was no bailiff, herdsman, or other servant
that he did not know their tricks and cheating. They were afraid of him as of
death. His dwelling was very fair upon a heath, with green trees shading his
place. He could purchase better than his lord. He was very rich, stored
privately. He could please his lord subtly, to give and lend him of his own
goods, and have thanks, and also a coat and hood. In his youth, he had learned
a good trade. He was a very good carpenter.  This Reeve sat upon a right good
steed, that was all dappled gray, and called Scot. He wore a long surcoat of
sky-blue, and by his side, he carried a rusty blade. This Reeve was from
Norfolk, beside a town called Baldeswell. He was tucked up like a friar, and
always rode at the back of the group.

There was a Summoner with us in that place, who had a fire-red cherub's face,
for he was red or pimply, with narrow eyes. He was as hot and lecherous as a
sparrow, with scabby black brows and a scanty beard. Children were very afraid
of his face. There was no quicksilver, litharge, nor brimstone, borax, ceruse,
nor oil of tartar, nor ointment that would cleanse or bite, that could help him
with his white pustules, nor the knobs sitting on his cheeks. He loved garlic,
onions, and leeks well, and to drink strong wine as red as blood. Then he would
speak and cry as if he were mad; and when he had well drunk the wine, he would
speak no word but Latin. He knew a few terms, two or three, that he had learned
from some decree; no wonder, he heard it all day. And you know well how a jay
can call "Wat" as well as the Pope. But if anyone would search him in other
things, then he had spent all his philosophy, and he would cry, "Questio quid
juris." He was a gentle rascal and a kind one; a better fellow should a man not
find. He would suffer, for a quart of wine, a good fellow to have his concubine
for a year, and excuse him fully. He could also secretly fleece a man. And if
he found anywhere a good fellow, he would teach him to have no fear in such a
case of the archdeacon's curse; unless a man's soul was in his purse; for in
his purse, he should be punished. "Purse is the archdeacon's hell," he said.
But well I know, he lied indeed: each guilty man ought to dread cursing, for a
curse will slay just as absolving saves; and also beware of a significavit. He
had the young girls of the diocese in his own control, and knew their counsel,
and was of their advice. He had a garland set upon his head, as great as if it
were for an alehouse sign. He had made a buckler of a cake.

With him rode a gentle Pardoner from Roncevalles, his friend and companion, who
had just come from the court of Rome. He sang loudly, "Come hither, love, to
me." This Summoner sang the bass to him, there was never a trumpet of half so
great a sound. This Pardoner had hair as yellow as wax, but smooth it hung,
like a strip of flax. His locks hung in ounces, and with them, he covered his
shoulders. It lay thin, by locks one and one, but he wore no hood for jollity,
for it was trussed up in his wallet. He thought he rode all in the latest
fashion, disheveled, except for his cap, he rode all bare. He had glaring eyes
like a hare. He had a small image of Christ sewn upon his cap. His wallet lay
before him in his lap, brimful of pardons come from Rome all hot. He had a
voice as small as a goat's. He had no beard, nor would he ever have one. It was
as smooth as if it were newly shaved; I believe he was a gelding or a mare. But
of his craft, from Berwick to Ware, there was no such another pardoner. For in
his bag, he had a pillowcase, which, as he said, was Our Lady's veil. He said
he had a piece of the sail that Saint Peter had when he went upon the sea until
Jesus Christ took hold of him. He had a cross of copper full of stones, and in
a glass, he had pig's bones. But with these relics, when he found a poor parson
dwelling in the countryside, he got more money in one day than the parson got
in two months. And thus with feigned flattery and jests, he made the parson and
the people his fools. But truly to tell at last, he was in church a noble
ecclesiast. He could read a lesson or a story well, but best of all, he sang an
offertory: for he knew well, when that song was sung, he must preach and polish
his tongue well, to win silver, as he could very well: therefore he sang very
merrily and loud.

Now I have told you shortly in a clause the estate, the array, the number, and
also the cause why this company was assembled in Southwark at this gentle
hostelry, called the Tabard, close by the Bell. But now it is time to tell you
how we behaved that same night when we arrived at that hostelry. And after, I
will tell of our journey, and all the rest of our pilgrimage. But first, I pray
you, out of courtesy, do not count it rudeness in me, though I plainly speak in
this matter. To tell you their words and their demeanor; not though I speak
their words properly. For you know as well as I, whoever shall tell a tale
after a man, he must rehearse, as closely as he can, every word, if it is in
his charge, let him speak no matter how rudely and broadly; or else he must
tell his tale untrue, or invent things, or find new words. He may not spare,
even if he were his brother; he must say one word as well as another. Christ
Himself spoke very broadly in Holy Writ, and you know well it is no rudeness.
Also, Plato says, whoever can read him, the words must be akin to the deed.
Also, I pray you to forgive me, although I have not set people in their degree,
here in this tale, as they should stand: my wit is short, you may well
understand.

Our Host made great cheer for every one of us, and set us to supper at once:
and served us with the best victuals. The wine was strong, and we were pleased
to drink. Our Host was a seemly man withal, fit to have been a marshal in a
hall. He was a large man with deep-set eyes. There is no fairer burgess in
Cheapside: bold in his speech, wise and well-taught, and he lacked nothing of
manhood. Also, he was a very merry man, and after supper, he began to play, and
spoke of mirth among other things, when we had made our reckonings; and said
thus: "Now, lords, truly you are very welcome to me: for by my word, if I shall
not lie, I have not seen this year such a company at once in this inn, as is
now. I would gladly make you merry, if I knew how. And I have just thought of a
mirth to do you pleasure, and it shall cost nothing. You go to Canterbury; God
speed you, may the blessed Martyr grant you what you deserve; and well I know,
as you go by the way, you intend to talk and play: for truly there is no
comfort or mirth to ride by the way as silent as a stone: and therefore I would
make you some sport, as I said before, and do you some comfort. And if you all
agree by one assent to stand at my judgment, and to work as I shall say to you
tomorrow, when you ride on the way, now by my father's soul that is dead,
unless you are merry, cut off my head. Hold up your hands without more speech."

Our counsel was not long to seek: we thought it was not worth discussing at
length, and granted him without more consideration, and bade him say his
verdict, as he pleased. "Lords," he said, "now listen for the best; but do not
take it, I pray you, in disdain; this is the point, to speak it flat and plain.
That each of you, to shorten your way in this journey, shall tell two tales, to
Canterbury-ward, I mean it so, and homeward he shall tell two more, of
adventures that once happened. And whoever of you bears himself best of all,
that is to say, who tells in this case tales of best meaning and most pleasure,
shall have a supper at the cost of you all here in this place, sitting by this
post, when you come again from Canterbury. And to make you more merry, I will
gladly ride with you myself, at my own cost, and be your guide. And whoever
will dispute my judgment, shall pay for all we spend by the way. And if you
agree that it be so, tell me at once without more words, and I will prepare
myself for it."

This thing was granted, and we swore our oath with full glad heart, and prayed
him also, that he would vouchsafe to do so, and that he would be our governor,
and judge and reporter of our tales, and set a supper at a certain price; and
we will be ruled by his decision, in high and low: and thus by one assent, we
agreed to his judgment. And thereupon the wine was fetched at once. We drank,
and each one went to rest, without any longer delay. In the morning, when the
day began to dawn, our host rose, and was the cock to wake us all, and gathered
us together in a group, and we rode forth a little way, to the watering place
of Saint Thomas: and there our host stopped his horse, and said, "Lords, listen
if you please. You know your promise, and I record it. If evening-song and
morning-song agree, let us see now who shall tell the first tale. As ever may I
drink wine or ale, whoever is rebellious to my judgment, shall pay for all that
is spent by the way. Now draw lots, before you go any further. He who has the
shortest shall begin."

"Sir Knight," he said, "my master and my lord, now draw the lot, for that is my
agreement. Come near," he said, "my Lady Prioress, and you, Sir Clerk, do not
be shy, nor study: lay hand to it, every man." At once, everyone began to draw,
and shortly to tell as it was, whether by chance, or lot, or fate, the truth is
this, the lot fell to the Knight, of which everyone was very glad; and he must
tell his tale as was reasonable, by promise, and by agreement, as you have
heard; what need is there for more words? And when this good man saw that it
was so, as he was wise and obedient to keep his promise by his free assent, he
said, "Since I shall begin this game, why, welcome be the lot in God's name.
Now let us ride, and listen to what I say." And with that word, we rode forth
our way; and he began with a very merry cheer his tale at once, and said as you
shall hear.
